While both of these methods are based
on the concept of distance,
which we've covered earlier,
they approach distance differently.
With the hierarchical method it is more
about determining the closest distance
between entities.
Whereas with the K-Centroid
method it is related
to finding the objects that
are closest to the centroid.
And while the hierarchical method maybe
easier to explain with a dendrogram
visualization, it usually works
better on a small set of objects and
can be slow with a larger set of objects
due to the large number of merge or
split decisions that it makes.
The K-Centroid, on the other hand, works
well with a larger set of objects and
tends to be more efficient in
creating the clustering solution.
The K-Centroid method works well
with rounded sets of data or
where the clusters are equal
sizes in densities.
Where it doesn't work well is where
the clusters have unusual shapes or
there are differing
densities among the data.
As we can see in the examples here,
in the top set of data, the clusters
should really be the two half circles.
But the K-Centroid process would
break up the half circles, and
assign some of the points to
the wrong clustered grouping.
In the bottom example, even though
the left set of points are sparse in
density, it seems like they should
be all included in the same group.
The K-Centroid process here could end up
combining the two right-hand segments
because they're so close together and
split the left set of
points into two segments.
In K-centroid models, the location of
the initial centroids, known as the seed
centroids can be critical to
the quality of the resulting clusters.
If there is bad seeding, it can affect
the performance of the process and
potentially give you
bad overall clustering.
Most clustering software will
automatically choose the initial seeds.
Now one software solution
that I've used in the past
basically just used the first objects
in the record order as the seeds.
And what I found is that
the cluster solution would
actually change depending on how
I sorted the same set of data.
So what is a better solution is if the
software provides for multiple starting
seeds that are chosen at random and
then have the results averaged.
Something else to keep in mind
with the K-Centroid method
is that it can be highly
sensitive to outliers.
If you think about it,
if you have object that is far away
from the rest of the cluster objects but
needs to be included in that
cluster because it's the closest.
Then it will effect where
the center of that cluster is, and
potentially change
an assignment of clusters
on the other side of the dividing
point for that cluster.
This is one reason,
as we've already mentioned,
that it is better to standardize or
scale the fields.
This scaling helps eliminate
the effective outliers.
Also as we will see in our exercise,
there are different methods within
the K-Centroid processes that
can account for outliers.